WINGS OF FIRE: An Autobiography
By A. P. J. Abdul Kalam with Arun Tiwari

AVUL PAKIR JAINULABDEEN ABDUL KALAM has come to personally represent to many of his countrymen the best aspects of Indian life. Born in 1931, the son of a little educated boatowner in Rameswaram, Tamil Nadu, he had an unparalleled career as a defence scientist, culminating in the highest civilian award of India, the Bharat Ratna.

As chief of the country's defence research and development programme, Kalam demonstrated the great potential for dynamism and innovation that existed in seemingly moribund research establishments. This is the story of Kalam's rise from obscurity and his personal and professional struggles, as well as the story of Agni, Prithvi, Akash, Trishul and Nag — missiles that have become household names in India and that have raised the nation to the level of a missile power of international reckoning.

At the same time as he has helped create India's awesome weaponry, Kalam has maintained the ascetic rigour of his personal life, working 18 hours a day and practicing the veena. With characteristic modesty, Kalam ascribes the greatness of his achievement to the influence of his teachers and mentors. He describes the struggles of his boyhood and youth, bringing alive everyday life in a small town in South India and the inspirational role of educators. He describes the role of visionary Indian scientists, such as Dr Vikram Sarabhai, and of the creation of a coordinated network of research institutions.

Arun Tiwari worked under Dr APJ Abdul Kalam for over a decade in the Defence Research and Development Laboratory (DRDL), Hyderabad. He is currently Director, Cardiovascular Technology Institute, Hyderabad, where he is pursuing Dr Kalam's vision of developing cost-effective medical devices using indigenous defence technology. Dr Kalam was elected President of India by a huge majority in 2002.

To the memory of my parents
My Mother:
Sea waves, golden sand, pilgrims' faith,
Rameswaram Mosque Street, all merge into one,
My Mother! You come to me like heaven's caring arms.
I remember the war days when life was challenge and toil —
Miles to walk, hours before sunrise,
Walking to take lessons from the saintly teacher near the temple.
Again miles to the Arab teaching school,
Climb sandy hills to Railway Station Road,
Collect, distribute newspapers to temple city citizens,
Few hours after sunrise, going to school.
Evening, business time before study at night.
All this pain of a young boy,
My Mother you transformed into pious strength
With kneeling and bowing five times for the Grace of the Almighty only, My Mother.


I was born into a middle-class Tamil family in the island town of Rameswaram in the erstwhile Madras state. My father, Jainulabdeen, had neither much formal education nor much wealth; despite these disadvantages, he possessed great innate wisdom and a true generosity of spirit. He had an ideal helpmate in my mother, Ashiamma. I do not recall the exact number of people she fed every day, but I am quite certain that far more outsiders ate with us than all the members of our own family put together.

My parents were widely regarded as an ideal couple. My mother's lineage was the more distinguished, one of her forebears having been bestowed the title of 'Bahadur' by the British.

I was one of many children — a short boy with rather undistinguished looks, born to tall and handsome parents. We lived in our ancestral house, which was built in the middle of the 19th century. It was a fairly large pucca house, made of limestone and brick, on the Mosque Street in Rameswaram. My austere father used to avoid all inessential comforts and luxuries. However, all necessities were provided for, in terms of food, medicine or clothes. In fact, I would say mine was a very secure childhood, both materially and emotionally.

I normally ate with my mother, sitting on the floor of the kitchen. She would place a banana leaf before me, on which she then ladled rice and aromatic sambhar, a variety of sharp, home-made pickles and a dollop of fresh coconut chutney.

The famous Shiva temple, which made Rameswaram so sacred to pilgrims, was about a ten-minute walk from our house. Our locality was predominantly Muslim, but there were quite a few Hindu families too, living amicably with their Muslim neighbours. There was a very old mosque in our locality where my father would take me for evening prayers. The high priest of Rameswaram temple, Pakshi Lakshmana Sastry, was a very close friend of my father's. One of the most vivid memories of my early childhood is of the two men, each in his traditional attire, discussing spiritual matters.

When I was old enough to ask questions, I asked my father about the relevance of prayer. My father told me there was nothing mysterious about prayer. Rather, prayer made possible a communion of the spirit between people. 'When you pray,' he said, 'you transcend your body and become a part of the cosmos, which knows no division of wealth, age, caste, or creed.'


I had three close friends in my childhood — Ramanadha Sastry, Aravindan, and Sivaprakasan. All these boys were from orthodox Hindu Brahmin families. As children, none of us ever felt any difference amongst ourselves because of our religious differences and upbringing. In fact, Ramanadha Sastry was the son of Pakshi Lakshmana Sastry, the high priest of the Rameswaram temple. Later, he took over the priesthood of the Rameswaram temple from his father; Aravindan went into the business of arranging transport for visiting pilgrims; and Sivaprakasan became a catering contractor for the Southern Railways.

During the annual Shri Sita Rama Kalyanam ceremony, our family used to arrange boats with a special platform for carrying idols of the Lord from the temple to the marriage site, situated in the middle of the pond called Rama Tirtha which was near our house.

My science teacher Sivasubramania Iyer, though an orthodox Brahmin with a very conservative wife, was something of a rebel. He did his best to break social barriers so that people from varying backgrounds could mingle easily. One day, he invited me to his home for a meal. His wife was horrified at the idea of a Muslim boy being invited to dine in her ritually pure kitchen, but Sivasubramania Iyer served me with his own hands and sat down beside me.

I moved to Schwartz High School in Ramanathapuram. My teacher, Iyadurai Solomon, was an ideal guide. He used to say, 'To succeed in life and achieve results, you must understand and master three mighty forces — desire, belief, and expectation.' Solomon raised my self-esteem and convinced me that I could aspire to become whatever I wished.

After Schwartz, I went to St. Joseph's College in Trichi for my Intermediate and B.Sc. in Physics. Only after graduating did I realize that physics was not my calling. I applied for admission to the prestigious Madras Institute of Technology (MIT), regarded as the crown jewel of technical education in South India. Around a thousand rupees was required for admission. My sister Zohara stood behind me, mortgaging her gold bangles and chain. I was deeply touched by her faith in me and vowed to release her bangles with my own earnings.
At MIT, three teachers shaped my thinking: Prof. Sponder who taught technical aerodynamics, Prof. KAV Pandalai who taught aero-structure design, and Prof. Narasingha Rao who taught theoretical aerodynamics and fluid dynamics.


After graduating from MIT as an aeronautical engineer, I joined the Directorate of Technical Development and Production, DTD&P(Air), Ministry of Defence in 1958 on a basic salary of Rs 250 per month. Later, at the Aeronautical Development Establishment (ADE) in Bangalore, I led a four-person team to develop an indigenous ground equipment hovercraft prototype called 'Nandi', christened after the bull ridden by Lord Shiva. Defence Minister VK Krishna Menon flew in the Nandi hovercraft and praised our work.

In 1962, I was interviewed by Dr Vikram Sarabhai and Prof. MGK Menon, and joined INCOSPAR (Indian Committee for Space Research) as a rocket engineer. We established the Equatorial Rocket Launching Station at Thumba (TERLS), near Trivandrum in Kerala, selected because it lay on the earth's magnetic equator. The historic St. Mary Magdalene church housed our first laboratory and design office.
On 21 November 1963, India's maiden sounding rocket, the Nike-Apache, was launched successfully from Thumba.

Later, the complex at Thumba was integrated as the Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC), led by the renowned metallurgist Dr Brahm Prakash. I was appointed Project Manager of the Satellite Launch Vehicle (SLV-3), tasked with putting a 40 kg satellite into low earth orbit.

On 10 August 1979, the first experimental flight of SLV-3 took place. The second stage went out of control due to a leak of Red Fuming Nitric Acid (RFNA) through an unseated solenoid valve, and the rocket splashed into the sea after 317 seconds. As Mission Director, I took full responsibility. Dr Brahm Prakash and Prof. Satish Dhawan supported me steadfastly.
On 18 July 1980 at 0803 hrs, the second SLV-3 lifted off from SHAR and successfully injected the Rohini Satellite into orbit. India had become a spacefaring nation with indigenous launch capability.


In February 1982, I was appointed Director of the Defence Research and Development Laboratory (DRDL) in Hyderabad. In 1983, the Integrated Guided Missile Development Programme (IGMDP) was sanctioned by the Cabinet Committee for Political Affairs with an allocation of Rs 388 crores.

Under IGMDP, five indigenous missile systems were conceived and developed concurrently:
1. Prithvi: Surface-to-surface tactical battlefield missile with liquid propellant clustered engines, delivering a 1000 kg warhead up to 150 km with 50-meter Circular Error Probable (CEP). Project Director: Col VJ Sundaram. First launched 25 February 1988.
2. Trishul: Quick-reaction surface-to-air missile using Command Line of Sight (CLOS) radar guidance. Project Director: Cmde SR Mohan. First launched 16 September 1985.
3. Akash: Medium-range surface-to-air area defence missile using ramjet propulsion and multi-target phased array radar. Project Director: Prahlada.
4. Nag: Third-generation 'fire-and-forget' anti-tank guided missile with imaging infrared (IIR) and millimetric wave (MMW) seeker. Project Director: NR Iyer.
5. Agni: Intermediate-range re-entry technology demonstrator missile with carbon-carbon composite heat shield surviving 2500°C re-entry temperatures at 12 Mach. Project Director: RN Agarwal.

After postponements on 20 April and 1 May 1989 due to technical snags and cyclone threats, Agni was launched successfully on 22 May 1989 at 0710 hrs from the Interim Test Range in Chandipur, Orissa. When Defence Minister KC Pant asked me how to celebrate the Agni success, I asked for 100,000 saplings to be planted at Research Centre Imarat (RCI).
On Republic Day 1990, the Padma Vibhushan was conferred on me for the success of India's missile programme.
